docs/ai-features.md, before:

# OpenAI Integration

Anode now supports real OpenAI API integration for AI cells, providing powerful AI assistance directly in your notebooks.

## Setup

### 1. Get an OpenAI API Key

1. Visit [OpenAI Platform](https://platform.openai.com/)
2. Sign up or log in to your account
3. Navigate to API Keys section
4. Create a new API key
5. Copy the key (starts with `sk-`)

### 2. Configure the API Key

Copy the example environment file and add your API key:

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit `.env` and add your OpenAI API key:

```bash
# .env
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-your-actual-api-key-here
```

The `.env` file contains all configuration needed for Anode, including sync URLs and kernel settings.

### 3. Start the Services

```bash
# Start web client and sync backend
pnpm dev

# In another terminal, get runtime command from notebook UI
# Get runtime command from notebook UI, then:
NOTEBOOK_ID=notebook-id-from-ui pnpm dev:runtime
```

You should see confirmation that OpenAI is configured:
```
🤖 AI cell support: enabled (OpenAI configured ✅)
```

**Important**: Always use the kernel command provided in the notebook UI to ensure proper notebook ID matching.

## Usage

### Creating AI Cells

1. In the Anode web interface, click the "+" button to add a new cell
2. Select "AI Cell" from the dropdown
3. Choose your provider (OpenAI) and model (gpt-4, gpt-3.5-turbo, etc.)
4. Type your prompt and press Ctrl+Enter to execute

### Available Models

- `gpt-4` - Most capable model (default)
- `gpt-3.5-turbo` - Faster and more cost-effective
- `gpt-4-turbo` - Latest GPT-4 with improved performance

### Example Prompts

```
Analyze this dataset and suggest visualizations
```

```
Explain the pandas DataFrame operations in the cell above
```

```
Generate Python code to create a scatter plot with matplotlib
```

```
Help me debug the error in my previous code cell
```

## Features

### Rich Output Rendering

AI responses are rendered as rich markdown with support for:
- **Code blocks** with syntax highlighting
- **Tables** and structured data
- **Mathematical equations** (LaTeX)
- **Links** and formatted text

### Context Awareness

AI cells have access to your notebook context and can:
- Reference previous code cells and their source code
- **Analyze cell outputs and execution results** 
- See text outputs, data visualizations, and error messages
- Suggest next steps based on actual execution results
- Debug errors with full traceback information
- Understand the current state of variables and data

The AI context includes:
- **Source code** from all previous cells
- **Text outputs** (stdout/stderr) from code execution
- **Rich outputs** like pandas DataFrames, matplotlib plots (as text representations)
- **Error information** including exception types, messages, and tracebacks
- **Execution state** to understand what has been run successfully

### Token Usage Tracking

Each AI response includes metadata about token usage:
- Prompt tokens
- Completion tokens  
- Total tokens

This information is logged for cost tracking.

## Configuration Options

### Custom System Prompts

You can customize the AI behavior by modifying the system prompt in `openai-client.ts`:

```typescript
const systemPrompt = 'You are a helpful data science assistant...';
```

### Model Parameters

Adjust model parameters for different use cases:

```typescript
await openaiClient.generateResponse(prompt, {
  model: 'gpt-4',
  maxTokens: 2000,        // Response length limit
  temperature: 0.7,       // Creativity (0-1)
  systemPrompt: '...'     // Custom instructions
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**"OpenAI client not configured"**
- Check that `OPENAI_API_KEY` is set correctly in `.env`
- Restart the kernel service after updating the `.env` file

**"Invalid API key"**
- Verify your API key is correct
- Check that your OpenAI account has credits available
- Ensure the key hasn't expired

**"Rate limit exceeded"**
- You've hit OpenAI's rate limits
- Wait a moment and try again
- Consider upgrading your OpenAI plan

### Fallback to Mock Responses

If OpenAI is not configured, the system automatically falls back to mock responses for development:

```
🤖 AI cell support: enabled (mock responses only - set OPENAI_API_KEY for real AI ⚠️)
```

This allows you to develop and test AI cell functionality without an API key.

## Cost Management

### Monitoring Usage

Monitor your OpenAI usage at [OpenAI Usage Dashboard](https://platform.openai.com/usage).

### Cost-Saving Tips

1. **Use gpt-3.5-turbo** for simpler tasks
2. **Set lower maxTokens** limits to control response length
3. **Be specific** in prompts to get focused responses
4. **Cache responses** when appropriate

### Token Estimates

Approximate token costs:
- **gpt-3.5-turbo**: $0.002/1K tokens
- **gpt-4**: $0.03/1K tokens  
- **gpt-4-turbo**: $0.01/1K tokens

*Check OpenAI pricing for current rates*

## Security Best Practices

### API Key Protection

- **Never commit** API keys to version control (`.env` is in `.gitignore`)
- **Use the `.env` file** for local development
- **Rotate keys** regularly
- **Limit key permissions** if available

### Data Privacy

- Be mindful that prompts and notebook content are sent to OpenAI
- Avoid including sensitive data in AI cell prompts
- Review OpenAI's data usage policies

## Advanced Features

### Output Context Integration

**New Feature**: AI cells now have full visibility into cell outputs, not just source code.

When you execute code cells, their outputs become part of the AI context:

```python
# Cell 1
import pandas as pd
df = pd.DataFrame({'name': ['Alice', 'Bob'], 'age': [25, 30]})
print(f"Created DataFrame with {len(df)} rows")
df.head()
```

```
Output: Created DataFrame with 2 rows
   name  age
0  Alice   25
1   Bob   30
```

```python
# Cell 2 (AI Cell)
# Prompt: "Analyze the DataFrame and suggest visualizations"
# The AI can now see both the code AND the actual DataFrame output
```

The AI will receive context including:
- The source code that created the DataFrame
- The print statement output showing 2 rows
- The actual DataFrame display showing the data structure
- This enables much more accurate and relevant suggestions

### Streaming Responses (Future)

Support for streaming AI responses is implemented and ready for future UI integration:

```typescript
await openaiClient.generateStreamingResponse(prompt, {
  onChunk: (chunk) => console.log(chunk)
});
```

### Multiple Providers (Future)

The architecture supports multiple AI providers. Future versions may include:
- Anthropic Claude
- Local models via Ollama
- Azure OpenAI

## Development

### Testing

# Run the OpenAI integration tests:

```bash
# From project root:
pnpm test:kernel
```

### Adding Custom Features

The `openai-client.ts` module is designed for easy extension:

```typescript
// Add custom methods
async customAnalysis(data: any, options: any) {
  // Your custom OpenAI integration
}
```

## Support

For issues with:
- **Anode integration**: Create an issue in the Anode repository
- **OpenAI API**: Check [OpenAI Documentation](https://platform.openai.com/docs)
- **Billing/Account**: Contact OpenAI support

## What's Next

The OpenAI integration provides a solid foundation for AI-powered notebooks. Recent enhancements include:

✅ **Output Context Integration** - AI can now see cell outputs and execution results
✅ **Rich Error Context** - AI receives full traceback information for debugging
✅ **Execution State Awareness** - AI understands what code has been run and its results

Future enhancements will include:

- **AI Tool Calling** - Allow AI to create cells, modify content, and execute code
- **Context Visibility Controls** - Let users control what the AI can see
- Real-time streaming responses
- Multi-turn conversations
- Custom AI assistants
- **MCP Integration** - Model Context Protocol support for extensible AI tooling

Happy coding with AI! 🤖✨

Commit message:

docs: clean up .env references to reflect per-package setup
- Remove outdated root .env.example references from AGENTS.md
- Update ai-features.md to use packages/pyodide-runtime-agent/.env
- Note that OPENAI_API_KEY from environment is automatically used
- Update ai-context-demo.md setup instructions
- All docs now reflect current auto-setup via pnpm install

docs/ai-features.md, after:

# OpenAI Integration

Anode now supports real OpenAI API integration for AI cells, providing powerful AI assistance directly in your notebooks.

## Setup

### 1. Get an OpenAI API Key

1. Visit [OpenAI Platform](https://platform.openai.com/)
2. Sign up or log in to your account
3. Navigate to API Keys section
4. Create a new API key
5. Copy the key (starts with `sk-`)

### 2. Configure the API Key

The OpenAI API key is configured in the pyodide runtime agent package. If you don't already have your OpenAI API key set in your environment, edit the runtime agent's configuration:

```bash
# Edit packages/pyodide-runtime-agent/.env and set your OpenAI API key:
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-your-actual-api-key-here
```

The `pnpm install` command automatically creates `.env` files for each package with sensible defaults.

### 3. Start the Services

```bash
# Start web client and sync backend
pnpm dev

# In another terminal, get runtime command from notebook UI
# Get runtime command from notebook UI, then:
NOTEBOOK_ID=notebook-id-from-ui pnpm dev:runtime
```

You should see confirmation that OpenAI is configured:
```
🤖 AI cell support: enabled (OpenAI configured ✅)
```

**Note**: If you already have `OPENAI_API_KEY` set in your environment, the runtime will use that automatically.

**Important**: Always use the kernel command provided in the notebook UI to ensure proper notebook ID matching.

## Usage

### Creating AI Cells

1. In the Anode web interface, click the "+" button to add a new cell
2. Select "AI Cell" from the dropdown
3. Choose your provider (OpenAI) and model (gpt-4, gpt-3.5-turbo, etc.)
4. Type your prompt and press Ctrl+Enter to execute

### Available Models

- `gpt-4` - Most capable model (default)
- `gpt-3.5-turbo` - Faster and more cost-effective
- `gpt-4-turbo` - Latest GPT-4 with improved performance

### Example Prompts

```
Analyze this dataset and suggest visualizations
```

```
Explain the pandas DataFrame operations in the cell above
```

```
Generate Python code to create a scatter plot with matplotlib
```

```
Help me debug the error in my previous code cell
```

## Features

### Rich Output Rendering

AI responses are rendered as rich markdown with support for:
- **Code blocks** with syntax highlighting
- **Tables** and structured data
- **Mathematical equations** (LaTeX)
- **Links** and formatted text

### Context Awareness

AI cells have access to your notebook context and can:
- Reference previous code cells and their source code
- **Analyze cell outputs and execution results** 
- See text outputs, data visualizations, and error messages
- Suggest next steps based on actual execution results
- Debug errors with full traceback information
- Understand the current state of variables and data

The AI context includes:
- **Source code** from all previous cells
- **Text outputs** (stdout/stderr) from code execution
- **Rich outputs** like pandas DataFrames, matplotlib plots (as text representations)
- **Error information** including exception types, messages, and tracebacks
- **Execution state** to understand what has been run successfully

### Token Usage Tracking

Each AI response includes metadata about token usage:
- Prompt tokens
- Completion tokens  
- Total tokens

This information is logged for cost tracking.

## Configuration Options

### Custom System Prompts

You can customize the AI behavior by modifying the system prompt in `openai-client.ts`:

```typescript
const systemPrompt = 'You are a helpful data science assistant...';
```

### Model Parameters

Adjust model parameters for different use cases:

```typescript
await openaiClient.generateResponse(prompt, {
  model: 'gpt-4',
  maxTokens: 2000,        // Response length limit
  temperature: 0.7,       // Creativity (0-1)
  systemPrompt: '...'     // Custom instructions
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**"OpenAI client not configured"**
- Check that `OPENAI_API_KEY` is set in your environment or in `packages/pyodide-runtime-agent/.env`
- Restart the kernel service after updating the environment

**"Invalid API key"**
- Verify your API key is correct
- Check that your OpenAI account has credits available
- Ensure the key hasn't expired

**"Rate limit exceeded"**
- You've hit OpenAI's rate limits
- Wait a moment and try again
- Consider upgrading your OpenAI plan

### Fallback to Mock Responses

If OpenAI is not configured, the system automatically falls back to mock responses for development:

```
🤖 AI cell support: enabled (mock responses only - set OPENAI_API_KEY for real AI ⚠️)
```

This allows you to develop and test AI cell functionality without an API key.

## Cost Management

### Monitoring Usage

Monitor your OpenAI usage at [OpenAI Usage Dashboard](https://platform.openai.com/usage).

### Cost-Saving Tips

1. **Use gpt-3.5-turbo** for simpler tasks
2. **Set lower maxTokens** limits to control response length
3. **Be specific** in prompts to get focused responses
4. **Cache responses** when appropriate

### Token Estimates

Approximate token costs:
- **gpt-3.5-turbo**: $0.002/1K tokens
- **gpt-4**: $0.03/1K tokens  
- **gpt-4-turbo**: $0.01/1K tokens

*Check OpenAI pricing for current rates*

## Security Best Practices

### API Key Protection

- **Never commit** API keys to version control (package `.env` files are in `.gitignore`)
- **Use environment variables** or package `.env` files for local development
- **Rotate keys** regularly
- **Limit key permissions** if available

### Data Privacy

- Be mindful that prompts and notebook content are sent to OpenAI
- Avoid including sensitive data in AI cell prompts
- Review OpenAI's data usage policies

## Advanced Features

### Output Context Integration

**New Feature**: AI cells now have full visibility into cell outputs, not just source code.

When you execute code cells, their outputs become part of the AI context:

```python
# Cell 1
import pandas as pd
df = pd.DataFrame({'name': ['Alice', 'Bob'], 'age': [25, 30]})
print(f"Created DataFrame with {len(df)} rows")
df.head()
```

```
Output: Created DataFrame with 2 rows
   name  age
0  Alice   25
1   Bob   30
```

```python
# Cell 2 (AI Cell)
# Prompt: "Analyze the DataFrame and suggest visualizations"
# The AI can now see both the code AND the actual DataFrame output
```

The AI will receive context including:
- The source code that created the DataFrame
- The print statement output showing 2 rows
- The actual DataFrame display showing the data structure
- This enables much more accurate and relevant suggestions

### Streaming Responses (Future)

Support for streaming AI responses is implemented and ready for future UI integration:

```typescript
await openaiClient.generateStreamingResponse(prompt, {
  onChunk: (chunk) => console.log(chunk)
});
```

### Multiple Providers (Future)

The architecture supports multiple AI providers. Future versions may include:
- Anthropic Claude
- Local models via Ollama
- Azure OpenAI

## Development

### Testing

# Run the OpenAI integration tests:

```bash
# From project root:
pnpm test:kernel
```

### Adding Custom Features

The `openai-client.ts` module is designed for easy extension:

```typescript
// Add custom methods
async customAnalysis(data: any, options: any) {
  // Your custom OpenAI integration
}
```

## Support

For issues with:
- **Anode integration**: Create an issue in the Anode repository
- **OpenAI API**: Check [OpenAI Documentation](https://platform.openai.com/docs)
- **Billing/Account**: Contact OpenAI support

## What's Next

The OpenAI integration provides a solid foundation for AI-powered notebooks. Recent enhancements include:

✅ **Output Context Integration** - AI can now see cell outputs and execution results
✅ **Rich Error Context** - AI receives full traceback information for debugging
✅ **Execution State Awareness** - AI understands what code has been run and its results

Future enhancements will include:

- **AI Tool Calling** - Allow AI to create cells, modify content, and execute code
- **Context Visibility Controls** - Let users control what the AI can see
- Real-time streaming responses
- Multi-turn conversations
- Custom AI assistants
- **MCP Integration** - Model Context Protocol support for extensible AI tooling

Happy coding with AI! 🤖✨
